MM-22402 - Opentracing article (#637)
mattermost/mattermost-developer-documentation: site/content/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing.md

---
title: "OpenTracing for Go Projects"
slug: open-tracing
series: "AST"
date: 2020-06-10T00:00:00-04:00
author: Eli Yukelzon
github: reflog
community: eli.yukelzon
toc: true
---

## What is distributed tracing?

> Large scale, cloud applications are usually built using interconnected services are rather hard to troubleshoot. When a service is scaled, simple logging doesn't cut it anymore and a more in-depth view into system's flow is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large scale, cloud applications are usually built using interconnected services that can be rather hard to troubleshoot. When a service is scaled, simple logging doesn't cut it anymore and a more in-depth view into system's flow is required.
```

> That's where [Distributed tracing](https://opentracing.io/docs/overview/what-is-tracing/) comes into play: it allows developers and SREs to get a detailed view of a request as it travels through the system of services. With distributed tracing you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's where [Distributed tracing](https://opentracing.io/docs/overview/what-is-tracing/) comes into play; it allows developers and SREs to get a detailed view of a request as it travels through the system of services. With distributed tracing you can:
```

1. Trace the execution path of a single request as it goes through a complicated path inside the distributed system
2. Pinpoint bottlenecks and measure latency of specific parts of the execution path
3. Record and analyze system behavior

> [OpenTracing](https://opentracing.io) is an open standard describing how the way distributed tracing works.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[OpenTracing](https://opentracing.io) is an open standard describing how distributed tracing works.
```

There are a few key terms used in tracing:

> 1. **Trace** - a recording of the execution path of a request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **Trace**. A recording of the execution path of a request
```

> 2. **Span** - a named, timed operation representing a contiguous segment inside the trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Span**: A named, timed operation representing a contiguous segment inside the trace
```

> 3. **Root Span** - the first span in a trace, a common ancestor to all spans in a trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. **Root Span**: The first span in a trace - a common ancestor to all spans in a trace
```

> 4. **Context** - information identifying the request, required to connect spans in a distributed trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. **Context**: Information identifying the request, required to connect spans in a distributed trace
```

A trace recording usually looks something like this:

![trace image](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/trace.png) 

> To add distributed tracing capabilities to [mattermost-server](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server) we've picked [OpenTracing Go](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go). We've already dove a little bit into Open Tracing implementation in the [first post of these series]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add distributed tracing capabilities to [mattermost-server](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server) we've picked [OpenTracing Go](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go). We've already dived into OpenTracing implementation in the [first post of this series]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}).
```

> To add distributed tracing capabilities to [mattermost-server](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server) we've picked [OpenTracing Go](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go). We've already dove a little bit into Open Tracing implementation in the [first post of these series]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To add distributed tracing capabilities to [mattermost-server](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server), we've picked [OpenTracing Go](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go). We've already delved into OpenTracing implementation in the [first post of this series]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}).
```

In this article we'll discuss all the nitty-gritty details of implementing a tracing system in your Go application without littering your code with repetitive, boilerplate tracing code.

> ## The Goal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## The goal
```

> So what are we actually working on? We want to make sure that every API request that is being handled by our server will get recorded into a trace, together with context information and ability to dive deep into the execution and allow easy problem analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So what are we actually working on? We want to make sure that every API request that's being handled by our server will get recorded into a trace, together with context information. This gives us the ability to dive deep into the execution and allow easy problem analysis.
```

The resulting system trace will look like this (using [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) web-ui visualization):
![jaeger view](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/result.png) 

## Naive approach

To add tracing to any API call, we can do the following in our `ServeHTTP` function:

> ```go

Reviewer 2: Might be also good to add the import statements so that it becomes clear what packages are imported.

func (h Handler) ServeHTTP(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	c := &Context{}
	// Start root span
	span, ctx := tracing.StartRootSpanByContext(context.Background(), "apiHandler")
	// Populate different span fields based on request headers
	carrier := opentracing.HTTPHeadersCarrier(r.Header)
	_ = opentracing.GlobalTracer().Inject(span.Context(), opentracing.HTTPHeaders, carrier)
	ext.HTTPMethod.Set(span, r.Method)

> 	ext.HTTPUrl.Set(span, c.App.Path())

Reviewer 2: It is not clear to me where the `ext` is coming from. Is it a package? A struct?

	ext.PeerAddress.Set(span, c.App.IpAddress())
	span.SetTag("request_id", c.App.RequestId())
	span.SetTag("user_agent", c.App.UserAgent())

> 	// On handler exit: a) in case of an error, add it to the trace b) finish the span

Reviewer 2: I think it might be better to write the a and b cases in the code itself. Before the if condition, and after it.

> 	// On handler exit: a) in case of an error, add it to the trace b) finish the span

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// On handler exit: a) In case of an error, add it to the trace b) Finish the span
```

	defer func() {
		if c.Err != nil {
			span.LogFields(spanlog.Error(c.Err))
			ext.HTTPStatusCode.Set(span, uint16(c.Err.StatusCode))
			ext.Error.Set(span, true)
		}
		span.Finish()
	}()

> 	// Set current context to the one we got from root span, it will be passed down to actual api handlers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Set current context to the one we got from root span - it will be passed down to actual API handlers
```

	c.App.SetContext(ctx)
	// ...
	// Execute the actual API handler
	h.HandleFunc(c, w, r)
}
```

> Next, we'll modify the actual API handler to nest it inside the parent span (we'll use `SearchUsers` as example)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll modify the actual API handler to nest it inside the parent span (we'll use `SearchUsers` as an example):
```

```go

> func (a *App) SearchUsers(props *model.UserSearch, options *model.UserSearchOptions) ([]*model.User, *model.AppError) {

Reviewer 2: I was slightly confused by the way this is worded, `SearchUsers` intended to be a handler. But it is actually an app layer method, not in api layer. It should have the signature of `c *Context, w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request` if it's in the api layer. We should clarify that.

> 	// save previous context

Reviewer 2: Nit: the previous comments start with a capital letter. We should be consistent throughout.

> 	// save previous context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Save previous context
```

	origCtx := a.ctx

> 	// generate new span, nested inside the parent span

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Generate new span, nested inside the parent span
```

	span, newCtx := tracing.StartSpanWithParentByContext(a.ctx, "app.SearchUsers")

> 	// set new context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Set new context
```

	a.ctx = newCtx
	

> 	// log some parameters

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Log some parameters
```

	span.SetTag("searchProps", props)

> 	// on function exit, restore context and finish the span

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// On function exit, restore context and finish the span
```

	defer func() {
		a.ctx = origCtx
		span.Finish()
	}()

	// ...

> 	// perform actual work

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Perform actual work
```

	// ...

> 	// in case of an error, add it to the span

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// In case of an error, add it to the span
```

	if err != nil {
		span.LogFields(spanlog.Error(err))
		ext.Error.Set(span, true)
	}

> 	// return results

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Return results
```

}
```

> Rather straight forward, right? We marked our "entry-point" by creating a root span, populating it with useful context information, then passing the context down the stack and creating new span underneath it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rather straightforward, right? We marked our "entry-point" by creating a root span, populating it with useful context information, then passing the context down the stack and creating new span underneath it.
```

> We could stop right here, because this is all you need to have a working trace! **But**: for a large application like `mattermost-server` wrapping all of the 900+ API handlers in tracing code would be incredible labor intensive AND will create a lot of noise in the source code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We could stop right here, because this is all you need to have a working trace! **But** for a large application like `mattermost-server` wrapping all of the 900+ API handlers in tracing code would be incredibly labor intensive and will create a lot of noise in the source code.
```

So, can we do better?

## Decorator pattern

> Before diving into our solution, I want to first introduce Decorator Pattern.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before diving into our solution, I want to first introduce the decorator pattern.
```

To quote [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern):

> In object-oriented programming, the decorator pattern is a design pattern that allows behavior to be added to an individual object, dynamically, without affecting the behavior of other objects from the same class. The decorator pattern is often useful for adhering to the Single Responsibility Principle, as it allows functionality to be divided between classes with unique areas of concern. The decorator pattern is structurally nearly identical to the chain of responsibility pattern, the difference being that in a chain of responsibility, exactly one of the classes handles the request, while for the decorator, all classes handle the request.

![decorator pattern](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/83/W3sDesign_Decorator_Design_Pattern_UML.jpg?1591628685344)

In simpler terms, let's say we have an object called `Cow` that has some methods:

![cow undecorated](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/cowundecorated.png) 

> We want to introduce additional functionality on top of what `Cow` already does, without modifying the actual code of the `Cow` object. For example, we want to measure performance of each method, and log the parameters that are being passed to each method. Here's how it would look if we apply the [decorator pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to introduce additional functionality on top of what `Cow` already does, without modifying the actual code of the `Cow` object. For example, we want to measure performance of each method and log the parameters that are being passed to each method. Here's how it would look if we apply the [decorator pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern):
```

![cow decorated](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/cowdecorated.png) 

> We wrapped each method of `Cow` in a chain of additional functions `f(x) = y` became `f(x) = a(b(y))`, each function having it's own responsibility.

Reviewer 2: Period after "additional functions".

Reviewer: I went with a colon but a period could also work.

> We wrapped each method of `Cow` in a chain of additional functions `f(x) = y` became `f(x) = a(b(y))`, each function having it's own responsibility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We wrapped each method of `Cow` in a chain of additional functions `f(x) = y` became `f(x) = a(b(y))`, each function having its own responsibility.
```

If we apply the same pattern to our problem, we can decorate all of `mattermost-server` API calls with OpenTracing, without actually modifying the functions themselves!

> Implementing such functionality in other, dynamic languages is rather trivial. For example, here's how JavaScript handles it. Given a simple `Cow` object:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Implementing such functionality in other, dynamic languages is rather trivial. For example, here's how JavaScript handles it given a simple `Cow` object:
```

```javascript
const cow = {
  feed: function(x) {
    return `Ate for ${x} seconds!`
  },
  speak: function(x) {
    return `${"Moo ".repeat(x)}!`
  }
}

console.log(cow.feed(20))
console.log(cow.speak(3))
```

> We can wrap it in a [Proxy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can wrap it in a [proxy](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Proxy):
```

```javascript
const tracerHandler = {
  get: function(target, prop, receiver) {
    if (typeof target[prop] === "function") {
      return function(...args) {
        console.log(`'${prop} 'called with arguments: `, ...arguments);
        return target[prop](...arguments);
      };
    }
  }
};

const timerHandler = {
  get: function(target, prop, receiver) {
    if (typeof target[prop] === "function") {
      return function(...args) {
        console.log(`starting '${prop}'`);
        const t1 = window.performance.now();

        const res = target[prop](...arguments);
        const t2 = window.performance.now();

        console.log(`'${prop}' took ${t2 - t1}ns`);
        return res;
      };
    }
  }
};

const proxy = new Proxy(cow, tracerHandler);
const proxy2 = new Proxy(proxy, timerHandler);
console.log(proxy2.feed(20));
console.log(proxy2.speak(3));
```

> Unfortunately, in Go, there's no way to do this in a performant manner (the regular approach would involve using reflection and that can have a serious performance impact on the underlying code)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unfortunately, in Go, there's no way to do this in a performant manner (the regular approach would involve using reflection and that can have a serious performance impact on the underlying code).
```

Reviewer: I'd like to say "negatively impact performance" but that may be obvious to the reader - and I'm not sure how it negatively impacts performance (speed, data, etc) so 0/5 on changing that unless it works better. :)

## Our solution

> Implementation of decorator pattern that we chose involved 3 parts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The implementation of the decorator pattern we chose involved three parts:
```

1. Struct embedding
2. Code parsing using AST
3. Code generation using templates

### Struct embedding

> Since Go is not object-oriented, it uses Struct embedding as a type of inheritance. Here's a small example:

Reviewer 2: No need to capitalize "Struct".

Also, might be clearer if you could expand of what is meant by "type of inheritance". Does this mean there are various types of inheritances ? Or embedding is a loose association of inheritance?

> Since Go is not object-oriented, it uses Struct embedding as a type of inheritance. Here's a small example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since Go is not object-oriented, it uses struct embedding as a type of inheritance. Here's a small example:
```

```go
type Animal struct{
	Name string
}

type Cow struct{
	Animal
}

func (c Cow) Speak() {
	fmt.Printf("Moo, I am a %s", c.Animal.Name)
}

func main() {
	a := Animal{Name:"Cow"}
	c := Cow{Animal:a}
	c.Speak()
}
```

> How does struct embedding help us in implementation of decorator pattern?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How does struct embedding help us in the implementation of a decorator pattern?
```

```go

> type IAnimal interface {

Reviewer 2: Idiomatic Go suggests the name should be "Speaker". But 0/5 on what you think is appropriate.

	Speak(x int)
}

type Animal struct {
	Name string
}

type TraceAnimal struct {
	IAnimal
}

type MeasureAnimal struct {
	IAnimal
}

func (c Animal ) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Println(strings.Repeat("I am a " + c.Name + " ",x))
}

func (c TraceAnimal) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Printf("Running Speak(x) function with x=%d!\n",x)
	c.IAnimal.Speak(x)
}

func (c MeasureAnimal) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Println("Timing Speak() function...")
	t := time.Now()
	c.IAnimal.Speak(x)
	
	fmt.Printf("Speak(%d) took %s\n", x, time.Since(t))
}

func main() {
	a := Animal{Name: "Cow"}
	c := TraceAnimal {IAnimal: a}
	d := MeasureAnimal{IAnimal: c}
	d.Speak(2)
}
```

Running the following code will yield:

```
Timing Speak() function...
Running Speak(x) function with x=2!
I am a Cow I am a Cow 
Speak(2) took 0s
```

> So we've basically implemented two decorators over original `Speak()` method, first we started timing the execution in `MeasureAnimal`, then passed it too `TraceAnimal` which in turn called the actual `Speak()` implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we've basically implemented two decorators over original `Speak()` method. First we started timing the execution in `MeasureAnimal`, then passed it to `TraceAnimal`, which in turn called the actual `Speak()` implementation.
```

> This works great and stays performant since we don't use any dynamic techniques here like `reflection`, however this is very verbose and requires us to write a lot of wrapper code, and that's no fun at all. We can do better!

Reviewer 2: reflection need not be in backticks

Reviewer: Should it be capitalized or italicized?

Reviewer 2: It should be a regular word. Readers would know it.

### Code parsing using AST

> Using the things we've discussed in parts [1]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}) & [2]({{< relref "./2020-03-15-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast-2.md" >}}) of these series we can scan the interface of the struct we want to wrap and collect all the information needed to generate the decorators/wrappers automatically. Let's dig in.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the things we've discussed in parts [1]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}) and [2]({{< relref "./2020-03-15-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast-2.md" >}}) of this series we can scan the interface of the struct we want to wrap and collect all the information needed to generate the decorators/wrappers automatically. Let's dig in.
```

Reviewer: 0/5 on "methods" but "things" is a bit vague.

> First of all, we kick of AST parser on our input file that contains the interface and start walking through the found nodes:

Reviewer 2: kick _off_

> First of all, we kick of AST parser on our input file that contains the interface and start walking through the found nodes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First of all, we kick off the AST parser on our input file that contains the interface and start walking through the found nodes:
```

> ```go

Reviewer 2: Might be better to wrap this in a main function along with the imports.

> 	fset := token.NewFileSet() // positions are relative to fset

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	fset := token.NewFileSet() // Positions are relative to fset
```

	file, err := os.Open("animal.go")
	if err != nil {
		return nil, fmt.Errorf("Unable to open %s file: %w", inputFile, err)
	}

> 	src, err := ioutil.ReadAll(file)

Reviewer 2: Please `defer file.Close()`  right before this statement.

Reviewer: @agnivade, I've capitalized "Positions" based on previous comments re: comment capitalization. Can you confirm that it's correct in this case?

Reviewer 2: Yes, the point is to remain consistent. If a comment starts with a period, it should do that everywhere. If it's not, then it shouldn't do that anywhere. This is just to maintain an exemplary standard of code. Since it's a blog post, it looks good to be neat and clean.

	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}
	defer file.Close()
	f, err := parser.ParseFile(fset, "animal.go", src, parser.AllErrors|parser.ParseComments)
	if err != nil {
		return nil, err
	}

	ast.Inspect(f, func(n ast.Node) bool {

> 		// ... handle the found nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
		// ... Handle the found nodes
```

	})
```

To differentiate interface methods from other AST nodes, we can do the following: 

```go
	ast.Inspect(f, func(n ast.Node) bool {
		switch x := n.(type) {
		case *ast.TypeSpec:
			if x.Name.Name == "IAnimal" {
				for _, method := range x.Type.(*ast.InterfaceType).Methods.List {
					methodName := method.Names[0].Name

> 					// here we can parse all the required information about the method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
					// Here we can parse all the required information about the method
```

					methods[methodName] = extractMethodMetadata(method, src)
				}
			}
		}
		return true
	})
```

> Let's define a couple of struct to help us collect information about methods:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's define a couple of structs to help us collect information about methods:
```

```go
type methodParam struct {
	Name string
	Type string
}

type methodData struct {
	Params        []methodParam
	Results       []string
}

> // for each found method, we'll store it's name, params with their types and return types in methods := map[string]methodData {}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// For each found method we'll store its name, params with their types, and return types in methods := map[string]methodData {}
```

Reviewer: @reflog, I'm not sure I punctuated this comment properly in terms of making name, types, types in methods being an actual list. Are those three items part of the found method?

Author: Yep. Your corrections are spot on

```

Now let's write a short function to populate these structs with metadata about a method:

```go
func formatNode(src []byte, node ast.Expr) string {
	return string(src[node.Pos()-1 : node.End()-1])
}

func extractMethodMetadata(method *ast.Field, src []byte) methodData {
	params := []methodParam{}
	results := []string{}
	e := method.Type.(*ast.FuncType)
	if e.Params != nil {
		for _, param := range e.Params.List {
			for _, paramName := range param.Names {

> 				paramType := (formatNode(src, param.Type))

Reviewer 2: Any reason why formatNode is within parentheses ?

				params = append(params, methodParam{Name: paramName.Name, Type: paramType})
			}
		}
	}

	if e.Results != nil {
		for _, r := range e.Results.List {
			typeStr := formatNode(src, r.Type)
			if len(r.Names) > 0 {
				for _, k := range r.Names {
					results = append(results, fmt.Sprintf("%s %s", k.Name, typeStr))
				}
			} else {
				results = append(results, typeStr)
			}
		}
	}
	return methodData{Params: params, Results: results}
}
```

> Now we can run the parser on our interface and we'll get something like: `map[Speak:{Params:[{Name:x Type:int}] Results:[]}]`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we can run the parser on our interface and we'll get something like: `map[Speak:{Params:[{Name:x Type:int}] Results:[]}]`.
```

> As you can see, we collected all the information needed about interface methods and we can now move on to generating decorator with this data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, we collected all the information needed about interface methods and we can now move on to generating a decorator with this data.
```
^^ Not sure if using "a" (or "the") is correct in this case? Seems like it should be but let me know!

Author: should be 'the' i think.

### Code generation using templates

Let's get to it! We'll start by defining a few helper functions that will be useful during code generation. They will operate on the metadata we've collected before.

```go
	helperFuncs := template.FuncMap{
		"joinResults": func(results []string) string {
			return strings.Join(results, ", ")
		},
		"joinResultsForSignature": func(results []string) string {
			return fmt.Sprintf("(%s)", strings.Join(results, ", "))
		},
		"joinParams": func(params []methodParam) string {
			paramsNames := []string{}
			for _, param := range params {
				s := param.Name
				if strings.HasPrefix(param.Type, "...") {
					s += "..."
				}
				paramsNames = append(paramsNames, s)
			}
			return strings.Join(paramsNames, ", ")
		},
		"joinParamsWithType": func(params []methodParam) string {
			paramsWithType := []string{}
			for _, param := range params {
				paramsWithType = append(paramsWithType, fmt.Sprintf("%s %s", param.Name, param.Type))
			}
			return strings.Join(paramsWithType, ", ")
		},
	}
```

Next we'll create a [Go Template](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/) for both our decorators:

{{< highlight go "linenos=table" >}}

> 	tracerTemplate := `

Reviewer 2: Let's also add the code generation prefix template: `// Code generated by <>; DO NOT EDIT.`

	package animals

	type AnimalTracer struct {
		IAnimal
	}
	{{range $index, $element := .}}
	func (a *AnimalTracer) {{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParamsWithType}}) {{$element.Results | joinResultsForSignature}} {
		fmt.Printf("Running {{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}}) with {{range $paramIdx, $param := $element.Params}}'{{$param.Name}}'=%v {{end}}",{{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{- if $element.Results | len | eq 0}}
			a.IAnimal.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{else}}
			return a.IAnimal.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{end}}	
	}
	{{end}}
	`
{{< / highlight >}}

> I know it looks a little scary, but the premise is rather simple. Given the following metadata: `map[Speak:{Params:[{Name:x Type:int}] Results:[]}]` we want to generate a new struct that embeds our `Animal` and wraps it's calls in additional functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I know it looks a little scary, but the premise is rather simple. Given the following metadata: `map[Speak:{Params:[{Name:x Type:int}] Results:[]}]` we want to generate a new struct that embeds our `Animal` and wraps its calls in additional functionality.
```

I'll go through the template line by line:

> **2-6**: Define the new struct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **2-6**: Define the new struct
```

> **7**: Iterate over methods in our metadata

Reviewer 2: Separate these by newlines. They actually appear in a single para in the markdown. Or make it a bulleted list, to prevent extra linegaps.

> **7**: Iterate over methods in our metadata

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **7**: Iterate over methods in our metadata
```

> **8**: Define a function on the new struct that has exactly the same signature as original one

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **8**: Define a function on the new struct that has exactly the same signature as original one
```

> **9**: Print all function parameters by iterating of `$element.Params` using the helper functions defined above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **9**: Print all function parameters by iterating on `$element.Params` using the helper functions defined above
```

Reviewer: Unsure whether it's meant to be "iterating on" or "iterating of". "On" makes more sense to me (but I'm a different audience).

> **10-14**: Run the actual code and either exit the function or return the results, depending on function signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **10-14**: Run the actual code and either exit the function or return the results, depending on function signature
```

For the `Timer` decorator, we'll write the following template:

{{< highlight go "linenos=table" >}}
	timerTemplate := `
	package animals

	type AnimalTimer struct {
		IAnimal
	}
	{{range $index, $element := .}}
	func (a *AnimalTimer) {{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParamsWithType}}) {{$element.Results | joinResultsForSignature}} {
		fmt.Println("Timing {{$index}} function...")
		__t := time.Now()
		{{- if $element.Results | len | eq 0}}
			a.IAnimal.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{else}}
			ret := a.IAnimal.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{end}}	
		fmt.Printf("{{$index}} took %s\n", x, time.Since(__t))
		{{- if not ($element.Results | len | eq 0)}}
		return ret
		{{end}}	

	}
	{{end}}
	`
{{< / highlight >}}

This is very similar to the template above, only this time we record the start time of the function and print the elapsed time on exit.

With these templates in hand, we can now generate the decorators!

```go

> 	// create output buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Create output buffer
```

	out := bytes.NewBufferString("")

> 	// parse the template and pass it the helper functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Parse the template and pass it the helper functions
```

	t := template.Must(template.New("my.go.tmpl").Funcs(helperFuncs).Parse(tracerTemplate))

> 	// execute the template and pass it the metadata we collected before

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Execute the template and pass it the metadata we collected before
```

	t.Execute(out, metadata)

> 	// add needed imports and format the code before printing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
	// Add needed imports and format the code before printing
```

> 	formattedCode, _ := imports.Process("animal_tracer.go", out.Bytes(), &imports.Options{Comments: true})

Reviewer 2: Let's check the error also.

	// print it out!
	fmt.Println(string(formattedCode))
```

The result will be:

```go
package animals

import "fmt"

type AnimalTracer struct {
	IAnimal
}

func (a *AnimalTracer) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Printf("Running Speak(x) with 'x'=%v ", x)
	a.IAnimal.Speak(x)
}
```

Beautiful!

Similarly, running the generator over the `timerTemplate` will yield:

```go
package animals

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

type AnimalTimer struct {
	IAnimal
}

func (a *AnimalTimer) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Println("Timing Speak function...")
	__t := time.Now()
	a.IAnimal.Speak(x)
	fmt.Printf("Speak took %s\n", x, time.Since(__t))
}
```

## Finishing up

> Using the techniques from the previous section, we can now generate the Open Tracing decorator we want by using the following template:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the techniques from the previous section, we can now generate the OpenTracing decorator we want by using the following template:
```

```go
{{range $index, $element := .Methods}}
func (a *{{$.Name}}) {{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParamsWithType}}) {{$element.Results | joinResultsForSignature}} {
	origCtx := a.ctx
	span, newCtx := tracing.StartSpanWithParentByContext(a.ctx, "app.{{$index}}")

	a.ctx = newCtx
	a.app.Srv().Store.SetContext(newCtx)
	defer func() { 
		a.app.Srv().Store.SetContext(origCtx)
		a.ctx = origCtx 
	}()
	{{range $paramIdx, $param := $element.Params}}
		{{ shouldTrace $element.ParamsToTrace $param.Name }}
	{{end}}
	defer span.Finish()
	{{- if $element.Results | len | eq 0}}
		a.app.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
	{{else}}
		{{$element.Results | genResultsVars}} := a.app.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{if $element.Results | errorPresent}}
			if {{$element.Results | errorVar}} != nil {
				span.LogFields(spanlog.Error({{$element.Results | errorVar}}))
				ext.Error.Set(span, true)
			}
		{{end}}		
		return {{$element.Results | genResultsVars -}}
	{{end}}}
{{end}}
```

> Phew, this was quite a trip, huh? I hope you found it interesting. You can see the actual generator implementation inside `mattermost-server` in [/app/layer_generators/main.go](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/master/app/layer_generators/main.go)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Phew, this was quite a trip, huh? I hope you found it interesting. You can see the actual generator implementation inside `mattermost-server` in [/app/layer_generators/main.go](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/master/app/layer_generators/main.go).
```

> > __Side note__: this is just one way of handling this problem. Some people are against using code-generation too much since it hides a lot of implementation away and complicates the build process (you have to re-run the generators each time your interface changes). We've settled on this approach due to it's flexibility and performance. If you have any notes or ideas on how this could be implemented cleaner - please stop by the [Mattermost Community](https://community.mattermost.com) and I'll be **very** glad to discuss it further.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Side note*: This is just one way of handling this problem. Some people are against using code-generation too much since it hides a lot of implementation and complicates the build process (you have to re-run the generators each time your interface changes). We've settled on this approach due to its flexibility and performance. 

If you have any notes or ideas on how this could be implemented in a cleaner way - please stop by the [Mattermost Community](https://community.mattermost.com) server and I'll be **very** glad to discuss it further.
```

---
title: "OpenTracing for Go Projects"
slug: open-tracing
series: "AST"
date: 2020-06-10T00:00:00-04:00
author: Eli Yukelzon
github: reflog
community: eli.yukelzon
toc: true
---

## What is distributed tracing?

> Large scale, cloud applications are usually built using interconnected services that can be rather hard to troubleshoot. When a service is scaled, simple logging doesn't cut it anymore and a more in-depth view into system's flow is required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Large-scale cloud applications are usually built using interconnected services that can be rather hard to troubleshoot. When a service is scaled, simple logging doesn't cut it anymore and a more in-depth view into system's flow is required.
```

> That's where [Distributed tracing](https://opentracing.io/docs/overview/what-is-tracing/) comes into play; it allows developers and SREs to get a detailed view of a request as it travels through the system of services. With distributed tracing you can:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That's where [distributed tracing](https://opentracing.io/docs/overview/what-is-tracing/) comes into play; it allows developers and SREs to get a detailed view of a request as it travels through the system of services. With distributed tracing you can:
```

1. Trace the execution path of a single request as it goes through a complicated path inside the distributed system
2. Pinpoint bottlenecks and measure latency of specific parts of the execution path
3. Record and analyze system behavior

[OpenTracing](https://opentracing.io) is an open standard describing how distributed tracing works.

There are a few key terms used in tracing:

> 1. **Trace**: A recording of the execution path of a request

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Trace**: A recording of the execution path of a request
```

> 2. **Span**: A named, timed operation representing a contiguous segment inside the trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Span**: A named, timed operation representing a contiguous segment inside the trace
```

> 3. **Root Span**: The first span in a trace - a common ancestor to all spans in a trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Root Span**: The first span in a trace - a common ancestor to all spans in a trace
```

> 4. **Context**: Information identifying the request, required to connect spans in a distributed trace

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **Context**: Information identifying the request, required to connect spans in a distributed trace
```

A trace recording usually looks something like this:

![trace image](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/trace.png) 

We've previously explored an OpenTracing implementation in the [first post of this series]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}). Next, we want to add distributed tracing capabilities to [mattermost-server](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server). For this, we've picked [OpenTracing Go](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go). 

In this article we'll discuss all the nitty-gritty details of implementing a tracing system in your Go application without littering your code with repetitive, boilerplate tracing code.

## The goal

So what are we actually working on? We want to make sure that every API request that's being handled by our server will get recorded into a trace, together with context information. This gives us the ability to dive deep into the execution and allow easy problem analysis.

The resulting system trace will look like this (using [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) web-ui visualization):
![jaeger view](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/result.png) 

> ## Naive approach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Naive approach
```
I wonder if we could rename this to "Simple tracing implementation"? Reason for this is because we don't refer to a "Sophisticated approach" as a counterpart. 

I'm 0/5 on the replacement word/term, but 4/5 on changing it.

Author: @justinegeffen what do you think about "Straightforward tracing implementation"? Because I don't know if "simple" works here...

Reviewer: That works well!

	"github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go/ext"
	spanlog "github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go/log"
)

func (h Handler) ServeHTTP(w http.ResponseWriter, r *http.Request) {
	c := &Context{}
	// Start root span
	span, ctx := tracing.StartRootSpanByContext(context.Background(), "apiHandler")
	// Populate different span fields based on request headers
	carrier := opentracing.HTTPHeadersCarrier(r.Header)
	_ = opentracing.GlobalTracer().Inject(span.Context(), opentracing.HTTPHeaders, carrier)
	ext.HTTPMethod.Set(span, r.Method)
	ext.HTTPUrl.Set(span, c.App.Path())
	ext.PeerAddress.Set(span, c.App.IpAddress())
	span.SetTag("request_id", c.App.RequestId())
	span.SetTag("user_agent", c.App.UserAgent())
	// On handler exit, do the following:
	defer func() {
		// In case of an error, add it to the trace
		if c.Err != nil {
			span.LogFields(spanlog.Error(c.Err))
			ext.HTTPStatusCode.Set(span, uint16(c.Err.StatusCode))
			ext.Error.Set(span, true)
		}
		// Finish the span
		span.Finish()
	}()
	// Set current context to the one we got from root span - it will be passed down to actual API handlers
	c.App.SetContext(ctx)
	// ...
	// Execute the actual API handler
	h.HandleFunc(c, w, r)
}
```

> Next, we'll modify the actual business logic function that is called by the API handler to nest it inside the parent span (we'll use `SearchUsers` as an example):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, we'll modify the actual business logic function that's called by the API handler to nest it inside the parent span (we'll use `SearchUsers` as an example):
```

So, can we do better?

## Decorator pattern

Before diving into our solution, I want to first introduce the decorator pattern.

To quote [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern):

> In object-oriented programming, the decorator pattern is a design pattern that allows behavior to be added to an individual object, dynamically, without affecting the behavior of other objects from the same class. The decorator pattern is often useful for adhering to the Single Responsibility Principle, as it allows functionality to be divided between classes with unique areas of concern. The decorator pattern is structurally nearly identical to the chain of responsibility pattern, the difference being that in a chain of responsibility, exactly one of the classes handles the request, while for the decorator, all classes handle the request.

![decorator pattern](https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/8/83/W3sDesign_Decorator_Design_Pattern_UML.jpg?1591628685344)

In simpler terms, let's say we have an object called `Cow` that has some methods:

![cow undecorated](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/cowundecorated.png) 

> We want to introduce additional functionality on top of what `Cow` already does, without modifying the actual code of the `Cow` object. For example, we want to measure performance of each method and log the parameters that are being passed to each method. Here's how it would look if we apply the [decorator pattern](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Decorator_pattern):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We want to introduce additional functionality on top of what `Cow` already does, without modifying the actual code of the `Cow` object. For example, we want to measure performance of each method and log the parameters that are being passed to each method. Here's how it would look if we apply the decorator pattern:
```

Author: @justinegeffen - why no link? :)

        console.log(`'${prop} 'called with arguments: `, ...arguments);
        return target[prop](...arguments);
      };
    }
  }
};

const timerHandler = {
  get: function(target, prop, receiver) {
    if (typeof target[prop] === "function") {
      return function(...args) {
        console.log(`starting '${prop}'`);
        const t1 = window.performance.now();

        const res = target[prop](...arguments);
        const t2 = window.performance.now();

        console.log(`'${prop}' took ${t2 - t1}ns`);
        return res;
      };
    }
  }
};

const proxy = new Proxy(cow, tracerHandler);
const proxy2 = new Proxy(proxy, timerHandler);
console.log(proxy2.feed(20));
console.log(proxy2.speak(3));
```

Unfortunately, in Go, there's no way to do this in a performant manner, and the regular approach would involve using reflection which can seriously impact performance on the underlying code.

## Our solution

The implementation of the decorator pattern we chose involved three parts:

1. Struct embedding
2. Code parsing using AST
3. Code generation using templates

### Struct embedding

Quoting [Go FAQ](https://golang.org/doc/faq#Is_Go_an_object-oriented_language)

> > Although Go has types and methods and allows an object-oriented style of programming, there is no type hierarchy. The concept of "interface" in Go provides a different approach that we believe is easy to use and in some ways more general. There are also ways to embed types in other types to provide something analogous **but not identical** to subclassing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Although Go has types and methods and allows an object-oriented style of programming, there is no type hierarchy. The concept of "interface" in Go provides a different approach that we believe is easy to use and in some ways more general. There are also ways to embed types in other types to provide something analogous **but not identical** to subclassing.
```

```go
type Animal struct{
	Name string
}

type Cow struct{
	Animal
}

func (c Cow) Speak() {
	fmt.Printf("Moo, I am a %s", c.Animal.Name)
}

func main() {
	a := Animal{Name:"Cow"}
	c := Cow{Animal:a}
	c.Speak()
}
```

How does struct embedding help us in the implementation of a decorator pattern?

```go

type Speaker interface {
	Speak(x int)
}

type Animal struct {
	Name string
}

type TraceAnimal struct {
	Speaker
}

type MeasureAnimal struct {
	Speaker
}

func (c Animal ) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Println(strings.Repeat("I am a " + c.Name + " ",x))
}

func (c TraceAnimal) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Printf("Running Speak(x) function with x=%d!\n",x)
	c.Speaker.Speak(x)
}

func (c MeasureAnimal) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Println("Timing Speak() function...")
	t := time.Now()
	c.Speaker.Speak(x)
	
	fmt.Printf("Speak(%d) took %s\n", x, time.Since(t))
}

func main() {
	a := Animal{Name: "Cow"}
	c := TraceAnimal {Speaker: a}
	d := MeasureAnimal{Speaker: c}
	d.Speak(2)
}
```

Running the following code will yield:

```
Timing Speak() function...
Running Speak(x) function with x=2!
I am a Cow I am a Cow 
Speak(2) took 0s
```

> So we've basically implemented two decorators over original `Speak()` method. First we started timing the execution in `MeasureAnimal`, then passed it to `TraceAnimal`, which in turn called the actual `Speak()` implementation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So we've basically implemented two decorators over the original `Speak()` method. First we started timing the execution in `MeasureAnimal`, then passed it to `TraceAnimal`, which in turn called the actual `Speak()` implementation.
``

> This works great and stays performant since we don't use any dynamic techniques here like reflection, however this is very verbose and requires us to write a lot of wrapper code, and that's no fun at all. We can do better!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works great and stays performant since we don't use any dynamic techniques here like reflection, however this is very verbose and requires us to write a lot of wrapper code, and that's no fun at all. We can do better!
```
```suggestion
This works great and stays performant since we don't use any dynamic techniques such as reflection. However this is very verbose and requires us to write a lot of wrapper code - and that's no fun at all. 

We can do better!
```

			}
			return strings.Join(paramsWithType, ", ")
		},
	}
```

Next we'll create a [Go Template](https://golang.org/pkg/text/template/) for both our decorators:

{{< highlight go "linenos=table" >}}
	tracerTemplate := `
	// Generated code; DO NOT EDIT.
	package animals

	type AnimalTracer struct {
		Speaker
	}
	{{range $index, $element := .}}
	func (a *AnimalTracer) {{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParamsWithType}}) {{$element.Results | joinResultsForSignature}} {
		fmt.Printf("Running {{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}}) with {{range $paramIdx, $param := $element.Params}}'{{$param.Name}}'=%v {{end}}",{{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{- if $element.Results | len | eq 0}}
			a.Speaker.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{else}}
			return a.Speaker.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{end}}	
	}
	{{end}}
	`
{{< / highlight >}}

I know it looks a little scary, but the premise is rather simple. Given the following metadata: `map[Speak:{Params:[{Name:x Type:int}] Results:[]}]` we want to generate a new struct that embeds our `Animal` and wraps its calls in additional functionality.

I'll go through the template line by line:

> - **2-6**: Define the new struct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **2 - 6**: Define the new struct
```

- **7**: Iterate over methods in our metadata
- **8**: Define a function on the new struct that has exactly the same signature as original one
- **9**: Print all function parameters by iterating on `$element.Params` using the helper functions defined above

> - **10-14**: Run the actual code and either exit the function or return the results, depending on function signature

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **10 - 14**: Run the actual code and either exit the function or return the results, depending on function signature
```

	origCtx := a.ctx
	span, newCtx := tracing.StartSpanWithParentByContext(a.ctx, "app.{{$index}}")

	a.ctx = newCtx
	a.app.Srv().Store.SetContext(newCtx)
	defer func() { 
		a.app.Srv().Store.SetContext(origCtx)
		a.ctx = origCtx 
	}()
	{{range $paramIdx, $param := $element.Params}}
		{{ shouldTrace $element.ParamsToTrace $param.Name }}
	{{end}}
	defer span.Finish()
	{{- if $element.Results | len | eq 0}}
		a.app.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
	{{else}}
		{{$element.Results | genResultsVars}} := a.app.{{$index}}({{$element.Params | joinParams}})
		{{if $element.Results | errorPresent}}
			if {{$element.Results | errorVar}} != nil {
				span.LogFields(spanlog.Error({{$element.Results | errorVar}}))
				ext.Error.Set(span, true)
			}
		{{end}}		
		return {{$element.Results | genResultsVars -}}
	{{end}}}
{{end}}
```

Phew, this was quite a trip, huh? I hope you found it interesting. You can see the actual generator implementation inside `mattermost-server` in [/app/layer_generators/main.go](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server/blob/master/app/layer_generators/main.go).

> *Side note*: This is just one way of handling this problem. Some people are against using code-generation too much since it hides a lot of implementation and complicates the build process (you have to re-run the generators each time your interface changes). We've settled on this approach due to its flexibility and performance. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*Side note:* This is just one way of handling this problem. Not everyone wants to rely on using code-generation too much since it hides a lot of implementation and complicates the build process (you have to re-run the generators each time your interface changes). We've settled on this approach due to its flexibility and performance. 
```

A trace recording usually looks something like this:

![trace image](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/trace.png) 

We've previously explored an OpenTracing implementation in the [first post of this series]({{< relref "./2019-10-25-instrumenting-go-code-via-ast.md" >}}). Next, we want to add distributed tracing capabilities to [mattermost-server](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-server). For this, we've picked [OpenTracing Go](https://github.com/opentracing/opentracing-go). 

In this article we'll discuss all the nitty-gritty details of implementing a tracing system in your Go application without littering your code with repetitive, boilerplate tracing code.

## The goal

So what are we actually working on? We want to make sure that every API request that's being handled by our server will get recorded into a trace, together with context information. This gives us the ability to dive deep into the execution and allow easy problem analysis.

The resulting system trace will look like this (using [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/) web-ui visualization):
![jaeger view](/blog/2020-06-10-opentracing/result.png) 

> ## Naive approach

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Straightforward tracing implementation
```

	// Execute the template and pass it the metadata we collected before
	t.Execute(out, metadata)
	// Add needed imports and format the code before printing
	formattedCode, err := imports.Process("animal_tracer.go", out.Bytes(), &imports.Options{Comments: true})
	if err != nil {
		fmt.Printf("cannot format source code, might be an error in template: %s\n", err)
		return err
	}
	// print it out!
	fmt.Println(string(formattedCode))
```

The result will be:

```go
package animals

import "fmt"

type AnimalTracer struct {
	Speaker
}

func (a *AnimalTracer) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Printf("Running Speak(x) with 'x'=%v ", x)
	a.Speaker.Speak(x)
}
```

Beautiful!

Similarly, running the generator over the `timerTemplate` will yield:

```go
package animals

import (
	"fmt"
	"time"
)

type AnimalTimer struct {
	Speaker
}

func (a *AnimalTimer) Speak(x int) {
	fmt.Println("Timing Speak function...")
	__t := time.Now()
	a.Speaker.Speak(x)
	fmt.Printf("Speak took %s\n", x, time.Since(__t))
}
```

## Finishing up

Using the techniques from the previous section, we can now generate the OpenTracing decorator we want by using the following template:

> ```go

Reviewer 3: To be more consistent, should we follow the same annotation for templates here?

Author: thanks @isacikgoz , I'm not sure what you mean in this comment though. Can you elaborate?

Reviewer 3: I meant using annotation like below:
```suggestion
{{< highlight go "linenos=table" >}}
```

Author: I only used {{< highlight go "linenos=table" >}} for the example where line numbers were needed. Using it here won't change the syntax highlighting (it doesn't really support templates)

Reviewer 3: I see 👍
